= Mongomatic

Mongomatic allows you to map your Ruby objects to Mongo documents. It is designed to be fast and simple.

== What's different about Mongomatic?

* Follows Mongo idioms wherever possible.
* Only strives to do "just enough" and never too much.
* When possible, we defer to Mongo. For example, there's no Mongomatic query API, instead you use the same query hash syntax you would with the Ruby Mongo driver.
* No complex relationship management: if you want to model relationships then add your own finder methods.
* Minimal dependencies.

== Basic Usage

  require 'mongomatic'
  
  class User < Mongomatic::Base
    def validate
      self.errors << ["Name", "can't be empty"]  if self["name"].blank?
      self.errors << ["Email", "can't be empty"] if self["email"].blank?
    end
  end
  
  # set the db for all models:
  Mongomatic.db = Mongo::Connection.new.db("mongomatic_test")
  # or you can set it for a specific model:
  User.db = Mongo::Connection.new.db("mongomatic_test_user")

  User.empty?
  => true

  u = User.new(:name => "Ben")
  => #<User:0x00000100d0cbf8 @doc={"name"=>"Ben"}, @removed=false> 
  u.valid?
  => false
  u["email"] = "me@somewhere.com"
  u.valid?
  => true
  u.insert
  => BSON::ObjectId('4c32834f0218236321000001')

  User.empty?
  => false
  
  u["name"] = "Ben Myles"
  => "Ben Myles" 
  u.update
  => 137 
  
  found = User.find_one({"name" => "Ben Myles"})
  => #<User:0x00000101939a48 @doc={"_id"=>BSON::ObjectId('4c32834f0218236321000001'), "name"=>"Ben Myles", "email"=>"me@somewhere.com"}, @removed=false, @is_new=false, @errors=[]>
  User.find_one(BSON::ObjectId('4c32834f0218236321000001')) == found
  => true
  
  cursor = User.find({"name" => "Ben Myles"})
  => #<Mongomatic::Cursor:0x0000010195b4e0 @obj_class=User, @mongo_cursor=<Mongo::Cursor:0x80cadac0 namespace='mongomatic_test.User' @selector={"name"=>"Ben Myles"}>>
  found = cursor.next
  => #<User:0x00000101939a48 @doc={"_id"=>BSON::ObjectId('4c32834f0218236321000001'), "name"=>"Ben Myles", "email"=>"me@somewhere.com"}, @removed=false, @is_new=false, @errors=[]>
  found.remove
  => 67
  User.count
  => 0
  User.find({"name" => "Ben Myles"}).next
  => nil
    
== Indexes

Mongomatic doesn't do anything special to support indexes, but here's the suggested convention:

  class Person < Mongomatic::Base  
    class << self
      def create_indexes
        collection.create_index("email", :unique => true)
      end
    end
  end
  
You can run Person.create_indexes whenever you add new indexes, it won't throw an error if they already exist.

If you have defined a unique index and want Mongomatic to raise an exception on a duplicate insert you need to use insert! or update!. The error thrown will be Mongo::OperationFailure. See the test suite for examples.

== Validations

You can add validations to your model by creating a validate method. If your validate method pushes anything into the self.errors object your model will fail to validate, otherwise if self.errors remains empty the validations will be taken to have passed.

  class Person < Mongomatic::Base  
    def validate
      self.errors << ["name", "blank"]  if self["name"].blank?
      self.errors << ["email", "blank"] if self["email"].blank?
      self.errors << ["address.zip", "blank"] if (self["address"] || {})["zip"].blank?
    end
  end
  
  p = Person.new
  => #<Person:0x000001018c2d58 @doc={}, @removed=false, @is_new=true, @errors=[]>
  p.valid?
  => false
  p.errors
  => [["name", "blank"], ["email", "blank"], ["address.zip", "blank"]]
  p.errors.full_messages
  => ["name blank", "email blank", "address.zip blank"]
  p["name"] = "Ben"
  p["email"] = "Myles"
  p["address"] = { "zip" => 94107 }
  p.valid?
  => true
  
=== The Validation Helper (Expectations)

To make writing your validate method a little simpler you can use Mongomatic::Expectations. You must include Mongomatic::Expectations::Helper on any class you wish to use them. You can use expectations like this:

   class Person < Mongomatic::Base
     include Mongomatic::Expectations::Helper
     
     def validate
       expectations do
         be_present self['name'], "Name cannot be blank"
         not_be_match self['nickname'], "Nickname cannot contain an uppercase letter", :with => /[A-Z]/
       end
     end
  end
  
  p = Person.new
  p.valid?
  => false
  p.errors.full_messages
  => ["Name cannot be blank"]
  p['name'] = 'Jordan'
  p.valid?
  => true
  p['name'] = nil
  p['nickname'] = 'Jordan'
  p.valid?
  p.errors.full_messages
  => ["Name cannot be blank", "Nickname cannot contain an uppercase letter"]

You can use any of these expectations inside of the expectations block:

  * be_expected value, error_message - validates that value is true
  * not_be_expected value, error_message - validates that value is false
  * [not]_be_present value, error_message - validates presence of value
  * [not]_be_a_number value, error_message, options - validates that value is/is not a number 
                                                      Can be a string containing only a number).
                                                      Only takes :allow_nil option
                                                      
  * [not]_be_match value, error_message, options -  validates that value matches/does not match 
                                                      regular expression specified by option :with.
                                                      Also, takes option :allow_nil
  * be_of_length value, error_message, options - validates that value is any of: less than the number
                                                 specified in the :minimum option, greater than the number
                                                 specified in option :maximum, or in range specified by 
                                                 option :range                    
  
== Relationships

Mongomatic doesn't have any kind of special support for relationship management but it's easy to add this to your models where you need it. Here's an example that models Twitter-like followers on a User model:

  class User < Mongomatic::Base  
    class << self
      def create_indexes
        self.collection.create_index("following_ids")
      end
    end
  
    def follow(user)
      self.push("following_ids", user["_id"])
    end
  
    def unfollow(user)
      self.pull("following_ids", user["_id"])
    end
  
    def following
      return nil if new?
      self.class.find( { "_id" => { "$in" => (self["following_ids"] || []) } } )
    end
  
    def followers
      return nil if new?
      self.class.find( { "following_ids" => self["_id"] } )
    end
  
    def friends
      return nil if new?
      self.class.find( { "following_ids" => self["_id"], 
                         "_id" => { "$in" => (self["following_ids"] || []) } } )
    end
  end

== Note on Patches/Pull Requests
 
* Fork the project.
* Make your feature addition or bug fix.
* Add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a
  future version unintentionally.
* Commit, do not mess with rakefile, version, or history.
  (if you want to have your own version, that is fine but bump version in a commit by itself I can ignore when I pull)
* Send me a pull request. Bonus points for topic branches.

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2010 Ben Myles. See LICENSE for details.
